Oskar Johann Viktor Anderson (; ] – 12 February 1960) was a Russian-German mathematician of Baltic German descent. He is best known for his work on mathematical statistics and econometrics. == Life == Anderson was born from a Baltic German family in Minsk (now in Belarus), but soon moved to Kazan (Russia). His father, Nikolai Anderson, was professor in Finno-Ugric languages at the University of Kazan. His older brothers were the folklorist Walter Anderson and the astrophysicist Wilhelm Anderson. Oskar Anderson graduated from Kazan Gymnasium with a gold medal in 1906. After studying mathematics for one year at the University of Kazan, he moved to St. Petersburg to study economics at the Polytechnic Institute. From 1907 to 1915, he was Aleksandr Chuprov's student and assistant. In 1912 he married Margarethe Natalie von Hindenburg-Hirtenberg, a granddaughter of who was commemorated in "The Funeral of 'The Universal Man'" in Dostoyevsky's A Writer's Diary, and started lecturing at a commercial school in St. Petersburg while also studying for a law degree at the University of Saint Petersburg, graduating in 1914. In 1918 he took on a professorship in Kiev but he was forced to flee Russia in 1920 due to the Russian Revolution, first taking a post in Budapest (Hungary) before becoming a professor at the University of Economics at Varna (Bulgaria) in 1924. Anderson was one of the charter members of the Econometric Society, whose members also elected him to be a fellow of the society in 1933. In the same year he also received a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation. Supported by the foundation, in 1935 he established and became director of the Statistical Institute for Economic Research at the University of Sofia. For the remainder of the decade he also served the League of Nations as an associate member of its Committee of Statistical Experts. In 1942 he joined the Kiel Institute for the World Economy as head of the Department of Eastern Studies and also took up a full professorship of statistics at the University of Kiel, where he was joined by his brother Walter after the end of the second world war. In 1947 he took a position at the University of Munich, teaching there until 1956, when he retired. == Writings == * Einführung in die Mathematische Statistik, Wien : Springer-Verlag, 1935, * Über die repräsentative Methode und deren Anwendung auf die Aufarbeitung der Ergbnisse der bulgarischen landwirtschaftlichen Betriebszählung vom 31. Dezember 1926, München : , 1949 * Die Saisonschwankungen in der deutschen Stromproduktion vor und nach dem Kriege , München : Inst. f. Wirtschaftsforschung, 1950 == External links == * * ==References/Further reading== * * * Category:1887 births Category:1960 deaths Category:Mathematicians from Kazan Category:Baltic German people from the Russian Empire Category:Mathematicians from the Russian Empire Category:German statisticians Category:Statisticians from the Russian Empire Category:20th-century German mathematicians Category:Kazan Federal University alumni Category:Peter the Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University alumni Category:Saint Petersburg State University alumni Category:Academic staff of the University of Kiel Category:Academic staff of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich Category:Academic staff of Sofia University Category:Academics of the London School of Economics Category:Fellows of the American Statistical Association Category:Fellows of the Econometric Society Category:Fellows of the Royal Statistical Society Category:Fellows of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics Category:Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Category:Rockefeller Fellows Category:White Russian emigrants to Hungary Category:Hungarian emigrants Category:Immigrants to Bulgaria Category:Bulgarian emigrants to Germany