Orgyia postica, the cocoa tussock moth or hevea tussock moth, is a species of moth of the subfamily Lymantriinae of the family Erebidae found in the Oriental tropics of India, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Borneo, Java, New Guinea, and Taiwan. It was described by Francis Walker in 1855. ==Description== The wingspan is 20–30 mm for males.Oriental Butterflies and Moths In the male, the head, thorax, and abdomen are brownish. Forewings are brown with an indistinct oblique sub-basal line. Waved antemedial and postmedial lines approach each other at the lower angle of the cell. The area between them is slightly tinged with bluish grey and has a waved dark line edged with white on each side of the discocellulars. Two indistinct, waved submarginal lines are present. The apex is slightly tinged with grey and has some subapical dark streaks. Hindwings are dark brown. The female is wingless. Larvae are yellowish and clothed sparsely with brown hair. One dorsal and two lateral brown bands are seen. Paired tufts of hair are on the first and eleventh somites, projecting forward and backward. Lateral tufts of grey hair project from the fourth and fifth somites. Dorsal tufts of yellow hair are on the fourth to seventh somites. The head is red. The pupa is stout; in males, it is glossy black, with numerous short, small tufts of hair. Eggs are pillbox-shaped and pale whitish brown, with a darker ring encircling a depressed top. ==Ecology== Adult males are on the wing year-round. The name Orgyia is because the larvae have been recorded on a wide range of species, including Buchanania, Mangifera, Durio, Ochroma, Casuarina, Terminalia, Shorea, Hevea, Ricinus, Pelargonium, Cinnamomum, Acacia, Albizia, Caesalpinia, Cajanus, Cassia, Dalbergia, Erythrina, Pithecellobium, Pterocarpus, Sesbania, Xylia, Lagerstroemia, Eucalyptus, Tristania, Zizyphus, Malus, Coffea, Citrus, Santalum, Dimocarpus, Litchi, Nephelium, Theobroma, Camellia, Grewia, and Tectona.Oriental Butterflies and Moths The head, legs, and prolegs are pale red. The body is longitudinally banded in dark brown and pale yellow. The four dorsal brushes are pale yellow.The Moths of Borneo The parasitoid wasps of Telenomus are known to attack the eggs of this moth. ==References== ==External links== *Sexual dimorphism in developmental rate and ecdysteroid titre in Orgyia postica *Orgyia postica, Vietnam *Orgyia postica. Distribution map. *Semiochemicals of Orgyia postica, the Cocoa tussock moth Category:Moths described in 1855 Category:Lymantriinae Category:Moths of Japan Category:Moths of Asia Category:Moths of Sri Lanka