Olivia Jean Markel White (born February 23, 1990) is an American singer, songwriter, and multi-instrumentalist. She is known as the lead singer and guitarist of the all-female garage-goth rock band the Black Belles. == Early life == Olivia Jean Markel was born on February 23, 1990, to Brent O. Markel and Julie V. (Philippo) Markel. She has an older sister, Sarah, a younger brother, Brent, and a younger sister, Katlyn who died in 2019. Her paternal grandmother, Patricia (Berdon) Markel is of Filipino descent. Jean was raised in St. Clair Shores, Michigan, a suburb of Detroit. Her parents encouraged their four children to be creative. For her seventh birthday, Jean got her first guitar and started teaching herself to play. Shortly after that, as an Elmwood Elementary second grader, she formed her first band called Broken Glass. In middle school, along with a friend on bass and her younger brother on drums, Jean formed the Yazuka Drag Queens. Playing original songs, they won their school's talent show and went on to open at a show for a local band, Genders. On April 16, 2003, Jean's mom took her to Detroit's Masonic Temple to see her first concert, The White Stripes. That same year, she created a fan webpage dedicated to The White Stripes called Olivia's Peppermint Palace. By high school, Jean was a self-taught multi-instrumentalist and songwriter who spent her free time recording her own music using a computer microphone and layering the individual instrument recordings on top of each other using a free music editing program. At 16, she began playing small clubs around Detroit and handing out her homemade demo CDs to friends, family, and co- workers. “It was a hobby,” she stated to the New York Times in 2022. “I didn’t know you could make money off of music.” After high school, Jean enrolled in graphic design school. == Career == === Third Man Records: session work and various contributions (2009–present) === At 19 years old in 2009, after hearing that Jack White's supergroup, The Dead Weather, was going to be playing a show in Detroit, Jean headed to the venue and laid a path of her demos from the band's tour bus to the side door they used to enter the venue. A couple of weeks later, after listening to the demo, Jack White called Jean and invited her to his Nashville studio, Third Man Records, to record her songs with him. Jean dropped out of graphic design school, moved to Nashville and became a part of the Third Man Records family where she has contributed to many Third Man artists and projects. Jean appears in The Dead Weather's 2009 music video for "I Cut Like a Buffalo". Jean played bass on two tracks for the 2010 album the The Ghost Who Walks, the debut from Jack White's then wife, Karen Elson, and appears in the title track's music video. She continued to play bass as part of Elson's live band while she was promoting the album, including a performance on The Late Show with David Letterman in September 2010. Jean played several instruments on various tracks for Wanda Jackson's 2010 Jack White produced album, The Party Ain't Over. Jean also appears in the music video for a song from the album, "Thunder on the Mountain". She continued to play guitar as part of Jackson's live band while promoting the album which included a performance on The Late Show with David Letterman and a show at the Grand Ole Opry both in January 2011. Jean contributed to the recordings of several instruments and backing vocals for various tracks for several of Jack White's solo albums including Blunderbuss (2012), Lazaretto (2014), Entering Heaven Alive (2022), and Fear of the Dawn (2022). Jean appeared in White's 2012 music video for "I'm Shakin'" as well as played guitar and sang backing vocals for a live performance of the song on Conan in December 2012. Jean also appeared in White's 2022 music video for "If I Die Tomorrow." === The Black Belles (2009–2012) === After Jean moved to Nashville and became part of the Third Man Records family in 2009, Jack White introduced her to various musicians to potentially become her band. "I had a recording that I gave to Jack, and it was mostly instrumental music, but it was a jumping-off point for like, some project to begin. I did it for myself, but I didn’t play anything live, because I didn’t have a band." Jean met Shelby Lynne, Ruby Rogers, and Erin Belle when they all appeared in The Dead Weather's 2009 music video for "I Cut Like A Buffalo". The women would go on to form The Black Belles, and the songs Jean wrote and recorded for her demo became the material for the band. Jack White produced The Black Belles' first single, "What Can I Do?" which was written by Jean and released on January 26, 2010. White also directed the single's music video which premiered on February 17, 2010. Later that year, White arranged for "What Can I Do?" to be used as the theme song for Elvira's Movie Macabre, a revamping of the 1980s classic horror movie showcase hosted by Elvira, Mistress of the Dark, which ran from 2010 to 2012. In June 2011, Jack White produced the song "Charlene II (I'm Over You)", a collaboration between The Black Belles and comedian and television show host Stephen Colbert. The song is a sequel to Colbert's 2006 faux-eighties comedy tune "Charlene (I'm Right Behind You)". With White introducing them, The Black Belles performed the song with Colbert on The Colbert Report. With Jack White as producer and Jean as the main songwriter, The Black Belles' self-titled debut album, The Black Belles, was released on November 11, 2011. The band went on tour from November 2011 to June 2012, hitting clubs and festivals in the U.S., Canada, and the U.K. The Black Belles disbanded in 2012, with Jean citing struggles on the road and nerves behind the break-up. "Because the road can do some crazy things to a girl band. That was the first band a lot of us actually full-on toured with. So we were just getting used to things. So new to everything that we were all kind of tense and didn't know what was going on. ... So we were very vulnerable and, you know, nervous. So we would take our nerves out on each other." === Solo career (2014–present) === Bathtub Love Killings (2014): After The Black Belles disbanded in 2012, Jean took about a year off before going back into the studio. Using previously recorded music that didn't quite fit for The Black Belles, she had enough material for a solo album. Bathtub Love Killings was released on October 14, 2014. The title was inspired by a serial killer from the 1800's who killed three women in a bathtub. While Jack White produced the album, Jean wrote all of the songs and played almost every instrument herself. The first single, "Reminisce", debuted on September 15, 2014. Jean performed her second single, "Merry Widow," on Conan on November 10, 2014. Jean supported the album with a series of free in-store performances at record stores and clubs with a backing band consisting of drummer Jacob Edwards, (formerly with the Avett Brothers), Brett Mielke (Best Coast, Twilight Sleep), Nashville session player Micah Hulscher (Los Colognes) and bassist Taylor Zachry. Night Owl (2019): Jean's second solo album, Night Owl, was released on August 30, 2019. The title comes from Jean's tendency to be an insomniac and the fact that her creativity tends to be amped up at night. In stark contrast to Bathtub Love Killings, Jean took on the task of producing Night Owl herself, calling on the players she wanted for each part. The album's first single and title track, "Night Owl", was released on July 29, 2019, with an accompanying music video. Jean included a cover of Muhammed Rafi's Bollywood dance number, "Jaan Pehechaan Ho", on the album. Jean would go on to support The Raconteurs during the August and September dates of their 2019 world tour. She promoted her album with her own small tours and in-store performances with musicians that contributed to making the album that included bassist Jessica Wilkes, drummer Simon Knudtson, and guitarist Blake Talley. Raving Ghost (2023): Jean's third solo album, Raving Ghost, was released on May 5, 2023. She was once again in the producer's chair for the album with Jack White credited as co-producer. Recorded at Los Angeles's Valentine Recording Studios and Third Man Recording Studios in Nashville, Raving Ghost counts collaborators like keyboardist Bo Koster (My Morning Jacket), Roger Joseph Manning Jr (Jellyfish), as well as drummers Carla Azar (T-Bone Burnett) and Patrick Keeler (The Raconteurs), with engineering by Bill Skibbe (The Kills, Blonde Redhead, The Raconteurs, The Dead Weather, Jack White, Franz Ferdinand, The Black Keys.) The first single, "Trouble," was released on March 1, 2023, with the music video following on March 10, 2023. The title track, "Raving Ghost," was released on April 6, 2023. After heavy promotion from Third Man Records, Jean toured in May and June 2023 with a new backing band which included drummer Marcus Powell, bassist Erica Salazar (Light Thieves, Fossil Creek), and guitarist Marco Argiro (Marco With Love, The Serpenteens.) ==Personal life== On April 8, 2022, Jack White proposed to Jean near the end of a Supply Chain Issues Tour concert performance at Detroit's Masonic Temple, while "Hotel Yorba" was being played. Jean and White were married shortly afterward by White's business partner Ben Swank, who officiated on stage and was joined by family members. ==Discography== === Solo === ==== Studio albums ==== * Bathtub Love Killings (2014) * Night Owl (2019) * Raving Ghost (2023) ==== EPs ==== * Palladium with April March (2020) === with the Black Belles === ;Studio albums * The Black Belles (2011) ==References== Category:1990 births Category:American blues guitarists Category:Alternative rock guitarists Category:American women singers Category:American rock guitarists Category:American rock singers Category:21st-century American guitarists Category:Living people Category:Lead guitarists Category:One-man bands Category:21st-century American singers Category:Third Man Records artists Category:American women drummers Category:Guitarists from Detroit Category:21st-century American drummers Category:21st-century American women guitarists