The Olukwumi people are people with Yoruba ancestry. A subgroup of the Yoruba people of the Aniocha North area of the Delta State, Nigeria. They are not a significant population in anyway (numbering about 20,000 Maximum measured by the total Nigerian population growth since the census in 2006) and do not change the Igbo ethnic makeup of the Aniocha North Local Government Area of Delta State The Olukwumi occupy eight communities west of the Niger river, and are together known today as the Odiani Clan in Aniomaland. Ukwu Nzu (Eko Efun) town is the historical headquarters of the Olukwumi people and is traditionally headed by the Obi of Ukwu Nzu, Agbogidi. The present Obi is H.R.M. Obi Ogoh 1. Olukwumi villages select leaders through the Okpala Obi system, which is the Okpala (gerontocracy) of the Igbo. The Anioma people are the Igbo subgroup from Aniocha (Enuani and Olukwumi), Ndokwa (Ukwuani), Ika, and Oshimili areas of Delta State. ==Geography== The Olukwumi are native to an area just west of the Niger River's right bank. The area is rich in Chalk and Kaolin deposits which is known as "Nzu" in Igbo language and "Efun" in Yoruba, which has been traditionally mined and used by the people of the area for various cultural purposes. ==Etymology== The word Olukumi is said by some to mean "My confidant" or "My friend" in Yoruba. ==History== According to Olukwumi oral tradition, Olukwumi are is a blend of aboriginal Igbos and migrants from the Owo, Akure or the Akoko, depending on the Olukwumi town in question. Due to the subsequent blend and proximity of their settlements with Enuani speakers, they today speak both the Olukwumi and Enuani dialect dialects of Igbo language. Prayers and recitals in their native dialect are also being encouraged, while making conscious efforts to speak the language to their children and in their communities as a whole. Of the towns in the Odiani clan, only Ugbodu and Ukwu-Nzu are bilingual; the rest are solely Enuani- speaking. According to a report in the Sunday Tribune of October 24, 2010, they have also started to organize recitation and oratory quizzes and competitions in Olukwumi to preserve the dialect. Linguists are also documenting the language. For 40 years, Chief G B Nkemnacho, a lawyer of Olukwumi origin has documented his people's history as told by its elders as life experiences and oral tradition. ==Olukumi towns and communities== s/n Town Origins Comment(s) 1 Ukwu Nzu Owo Ukwu Nzu is said to be the political head of the Odiani clan of the Olukumi. 2 Ugbodu Akure, and Owo (Ogho) Traditional centre of Olukumi people. 3 Ubulubu People from Ugbodu and Ukwu nzu A relatively late Olukwumi town said to have been founded by some Ugbodu people later joined by others from Ukwu nzu. 4 Idumu Ogo 5 Ugboba (Ugbo Oba) 6 Ogodor 7 Ogbe Onei (Obomkpa) 8 Anioma village ==Non-Olukumi villages with Olukumi ancestry== s/n Town Origins Comment(s) 9 Onichaku (Ubulu Uku) 10 Ogbekenu quarters/villages of Onicha-Ugbo ==Language== ==Notable Olukwumi People== *HRE John Ofulue, (1894-1999) paramount head of the Olukumi kingdom, and UKU Clan. Born to the great Royal family of Ofulue in the EBOR lineage of Ogbeobi Royal Family. His father HRM Ofulue and Mother Anyasi Ofulue (née Onitshabor). HRE John Ofulue married Beatrice Ofulue (née Mokwunye). In 1944, John Ofulue joined others from West African States to go to Burma, India for the 2nd world war. He returned to Nigeria in 1946 and started the popular John Charter Transport Company. He was a reverred leader of the Olukumi kingdom, and his death in 1999 (105yrs) was widely celebrated due to his business successes and philanthropy. *Prince Joseph Akabudike Ochei, BSc, LLB, LLM, (1930-2022). A renowned Lawyer, economist, historian, archivist, diplomat, called to the Bar at Grays Inn of Court London, Solicitor of the Supreme Court of Nigeria. Author of the acclaimed book: 'Nigeria: The Road to Absolutism, Observations on the Executive Presidency in the Draft Constitution', 1977. His books and various seminal works published internationally and translated in fifteen (15) languages including, French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch, Mandarin, with electronic and print copies available in global research and public libraries in Oxford University, Cambridge University, British Library (UK), Yale University, Stanford University, Library of Congress Washington USA, and the University of Sydney Australia. Prince Akabudike Ochei is the youngest son of the ruling monarch Obi Ochei and his wife Nwasoma Ochei (née Ofulue) at the Royal Palace in Ugbodu. Nwasoma is the sister to HRE John Ofulue. The Ochei, Eboh and Ofulue royal ancestry can be traced across centuries from African Royal Dynasties. *Prof. (Prince) Joseph Ndidi Ofulue, FNSE - (First Nigerian Professor of Satellite Communications from Ugbodu), worked at Post & Telecom, NET, Nitel (Nigerian Telecommunications Plc), INTELSAT in Washington D.C., http://www.itso.int http://www.intelsat.com, he held positions as HOD and Dean at various Nigerian Universities. Prof. (Prince) Joseph N. Ofulue is the first son of HRE John Ofulue. Prof., as he his fondly called is an avid tennis player and the author of several technical books and publications in satellite communications and electronic engineering. A multi-award winning Engineer during and after his time at Nitel, Prof. served as GM Operations, GM Planning & Operations, GM Planning & Research, GM Research & Development, GM Abuja, and briefly as the acting MD of Nitel during the transition of the Gen. IBB regime to Chief Ernest Shonekan to Gen. Sani Abacha. *Nduka Ugbade - (Former Nigerian football star and coach) *Helen Anyamelune - (1958' Miss Nigeria) * Chinedum Mordi - (First Professor from Ugbodu, lectured at Delta State University, Abraka ==See also== *Yoruba people *Anioma people ==References== ==External links== *Olukwumi dictionary Category:Ethnic groups in Africa Category:Ethnic groups in Nigeria Category:Delta State Category:History of Igboland